The Thing About the PQ...

I saw a comedian on TV one night and he had a bit that went something like
this (I'm paraphrasing):

    When my wife makes a mistake, it's just a mistake!  It could happen to
    anyone!  When *I* make a mistake, though, it's part of a more general
    pattern of stupidity...

That's a bit how I feel with the Pauline Marois and the Parti Quebecois.
For example, I actually find myself largely in agreement with their goal of
[laïcité](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La%C3%AFcit%C3%A9), or making the
government a "religion-free" zone.  I agree with it because I don't believe
that religion has any place in a properly run government.

I applaud the idea - but, since this is coming from the PQ, my hackles go
up.  These are, after all, the self-appointed defenders of Quebec culture.
So I have a hard time believing that this has much to do with strengthening
the separation of Church and State, and a much easier time believing that
this is a xenophobic reaction to turbans and head scarves - or, at least,
that the proposed legislation is a concession to people who have xenophobic
reactions to turbans and head scarves.  Given that Marois made an exception
for the crucifix hanging in the National Assembly, the excuse being that the
crucifix forms part of Quebec's "national heritage", I don't feel that I'm
*too* far off the mark.

Or, to take another example, consider her [recent promise to ban non-French
speakers from running for
office](http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/quebecvotes2012/story/2012/08/21/parti-quebecois-non-french-speakers.html).
After the visceral revulsion subsides, and I let the whole thing marinate a
bit, I reluctantly have to admit that it makes a certain amount of sense.  A
member of the National Assembly would have to interact with largely
French-speaking coworkers on a daily basis.  It will go much better for
everyone if he or she can speak French as well.

So yeah, it could be practical...but I don't (nor, I suspect, does anyone)
believe that the proposed ban has anything whatsoever to do with
practicality.  If this were a solution to an actual, documented problem, I
might believe it.  But coming from the PQ, like the comedian said in the
quote, it just seems like part of a more general pattern of stupidity.  I
have a hard time believing that this is anything other than yet another
salvo launched in the never-ending language wars.

When the PQ wants to pass law banning Francophones from going to English
CEGEP, my thought is 
