Residents of Canada's two largest metropolitan areas, Toronto and Montreal,
often like to debate their relative merits. These debates are rarely
level-headed. There is, to put it mildly, deep-seated competition between
these two cities.

The arguments are most often biased as well, usually involving people who
have lived in one city or the other, but not both.

I, on the other hand, *have* spent a fair amount of time in both cities, and
so I feel I have something noteworthy to add to the din.  Here are my
thoughts on both.

First, and most obvious: Toronto is mostly English, and Montreal is mostly
French.  As you can see, I like to start with the easy, non-controversial
stuff :-)

Second, and also obvious: Toronto is alot bigger than Montreal, both in
population and in area; the former is often depicted as the poster boy for
Canadian urban sprawl.  Here are some statistics for your viewing pleasure,
fresh from Wikipedia:

## Toronto
Area:
 * City: 630 km2
 * Urban: 1749 km2
 * Metro: 7125 km2

Population:
 * City: 2,503,281
 * Urban: 4,753,120
 * Metro: 5,113,149

Density:
 * City 3972/km2
 * Urban 2718/km2
 * Metro 718/km2

## Montreal
Area:
 * City: 365.13 km
 * Urban: 1677 km2
 * Metro: 4259 km2

Population:
 * City: 1,620,693
 * Urban: 3,316,615
 * Metro: 3,635,571

Density:
 * City: 4439/km2
 * Urban: 1978/km2
 * Metro: 854/km2 

As you can see, Toronto is larger in both area and population, but actually has
a *lower* population density.  This is obviously part of the reason why
Toronto is often seen as "sprawling" while Montreal is often seen as
"concentrated" and "lively".

But I think it goes deeper than that.  If I had to guess, I'd say that
Montreal's population density varies alot more from neighborhood to
neighborhood, so that you often end up visiting areas in Montreal with very
high population densities.  If these high density areas are what you
mentally associate with Montreal, then it's easy to see why Toronto comes
off as "boring" by comparison.  The Plateau, for example, has a population
density of over 13000 people/km2.

And yet...people say that Montreal feels like a small town (you'd *never*
say that about Toronto).  My own theory on why that is (and it really is
just a theory) revolves around English/French relations.  Take a store like
Chapters.  Chapters sells primarily English books.  Other stores in
Montreal, such as Archambault, sell primarily French books.  People tend to
frequent one or the other, so while there might be four major bookstores in
the downtown core, it feels like there are only two.

And it's not just stores.  Areas in Montreal are often unofficially
classified along language lines.  The West Island is usually seen as
"English".  Hochelaga is often labelled as "French".  It's not unusual for
someone to avoid frequenting a neighborhood because of the language.  This
makes Montreal seem smaller than it really is.

I'm not sure if this is a "win" or not.  Montreal is a large city that feels
like a small town, which can be charming, but at the same time it feels like
certain parts of the city are "locked off".

## Demographics

I will sometime tell random Montrealers (well, okay, friends and workmates,
mostly) that 47% of the population of Toronto consists of visible
minorities.  This statistic is often met with glazed looks until I tell them
that the equivalent number for Montreal is 26%.  In other words, Toronto has
nearly *double* the visible minorities of Montreal. And Montreal is Quebec's
most cosmopolitan city.

The difference is even starker when you look at the Greater Toronto Area
(GTA) and the Greater Montreal Area (GMA).  The GTA consists of 43% visible
minorities and the GMA consists of 16.5% visible minorities.  Pretty soon,
the term "visible *minority*" won't be accurate when applied to the GTA.

So, yeah, Toronto has alot of immigrants.  As Bowser and Blue sang it:
"What's Toronto got that Montreal has not?  A Chinatown you don't miss if
you blink."  I personally think his is a solid mark in Toronto's favour; you
have the entire world ripe for the picking in Toronto.  This simply isn't
the case in Montreal.

I mean, I work with people who've never gone for Dim Sum.  

## Size 
