# Multiculturalism and Relativism

In October 2010 Angela Merkel, Chancellor of Germany, stated that
multiculturalism in Germany was a failure.

Saying that something has been a "failure" implies a thwarted goal.  Merkel
goes on to say that the goal in question was the integration of immigrants
into German society.  Immigrants (particularly Muslims) haven't integrated
into German society as much as the Chancellor had hoped.

Right there, I'm suspicious, because it sounds like what the Chancellor is
saying is that *integration* has been a failure, not multiculturalism.
Multiculturalism has always been, to my mind, the *opposite* of integration.
It's supposed to be a system where individual cultures are encouraged to
flourish, where immigrants aren't expected to leave their values at the
door.

Now, I live in Montreal and talking about culture in Canada has always been
a bit of a tricky issue because of what could be called the "chunkiness" of
this country's cultural landscape.  There isn't what you'd call a unified
culture here in the sense that Japan, Italy, Germany or Norway have a
unified culture - a feature we share, I suspect, with the U.S.

Oh, various pockets of culture certainly exist.  There's a Maritime culture
out east, a vaguely hippie culture out west, and French culture in Quebec.
And we've imported more cultures than I can count - most of them seem to end
up in Toronto, Vancouver and Montreal.  But unifying features?  You'd have
to look very hard.  The regionalism and the multiculturalism is strong up
here.

So it isn't so much that Canada doesn't have a culture, it's that we have
*many*. Toronto, in particular, often *defines* itself by how many different
cultures it has.

I don't know what definition of multiculturalism Merkel's working from, but
it appears to be vastly different from the one I'm used to.  The system in
Canada, for example, seems to be working tolerably well.  I mean, we have
pockets of relatively mild xenophobia (certain parts of Quebec and Alberta
come to mind) but for the most part we seem to be doing okay.  Racial slurs
are a rarity in my experience and saying something like "the country is
overrun with foreigners" would be enough to get you ostracized in most
social circles.

In practice, multiculturalism in Canada basically consists of

 * letting a whole lot of people into the country - more than any other
   country in the world per capita.

 * actively and publically encouraging people to express their culture via
   events like [Caribana](http://www.caribana.com/) and Chinese New Year.

 * making it relatively easy to communicate with government officials in
   languages other than English or French.

 * recognizing dual citizenship.

That's all fine from an official standpoint, but I will also note that
trying to generalize attitudes across a wide population is always a risky
proposition.  So instead of trying to describe what multiculturalism means
in Canada I'm going to try and describe what multiculturlism means to me.
In any case, Canadian opinions probably vary wildly from coast to coast.

Here's the thing.  There is no Canadian culture.  That's bound to raise some
hackles but, really, there isn't one.  Yes, there are pockets of stuff in
various places: the Maritimes has a certain vibe to it and Quebec does too,
but we don't have a culture in the same entrenched sense that Italy or
France or Spain has a culture.

No, we have something much, much better.  We have a cultural vaccuum and
into it flows every other culture in the world.  Lacking a culture of our
own, we've adopted everyone else's.  They're all here, ripe for the picking,
and let me tell you something straight from the heart: it is *beautiful*.

In a nutshell, being Canadian means that I get to define who I am, in a way
that goes deeper than if I were, for example, Italian.  Being exposed to a
multitude of cultures, without being brought up in any particular one, means
that I get to pick and choose the bits that I like from each, without
feeling like I'm betraying anything.  This is what Canada gives me, and I'm
grateful.  I'm *happy* to be a Canadian, if not exactly proud.

Some will say that I lack a sense of identity.  This isn't true.  I have
what I consider to be a rather strong sense of identity.  I have a good
sense of what my strengths and weaknesses are, of what and who I like and
don't like.  It's just that this sense of identity doesn't revolve around
something as random as where I was born or - even more absurd - where my
*parents* were born.  I was born in Canada, yes, but so what?  My blood type
is also AB-.  Should I dwell on that too?

In that a contradiction?  That I'm grateful for being born in a country that
doesn't provide the same level of cultural baggage I've come to expect from
other countries?

Have you ever tried Lutefisk?  It's a Scandinavian specialty - dried, salted
fish, rendered gelatenous by the application of lye.  By [all
accounts](http://kcbx.net/~tellswor/lutefisk.htm) it's utterly horrid stuff,
and I'm willing to bet that most Scandinavians think so as well.  I'm also
willing to bet that a large number of Scandinivians eat it anyway, not
because they like it, but because they're *supposed to* like it.  Because,
you know, they're Scandinavian, right?  It would be un-Scandinavian of them
not to like Lutefisk!

This is stupid.  Utterly, completely, *irredemably* stupid.

****

Metaphors always break down at some point.  The United States, for example,
is often described as a melting pot of cultures.  This is generally taken to
mean that people wishing to be a part of the U.S. are expected to integrate
themselves and adopt what are generally understood to be American values and
cultural norms.

Taking the metaphor further, of course, one can also point out that when you
have a _real_ melting pot, adding ingredients will often change the nature
of the stuff bubbling in the pot, until it no longer resembles what you
started out with.  You could try telling that to people who think that
immigrants needs to adapt to those that were here before them, rather than
the other way around, but if you did I suspect you'd get a reiteration my
main argument here, namely that metaphors always break down at some point.

You could also look at what is generally described as the Canadian Mosaic.
This is generally taken to mean that immigrants in Canada are encouraged to
keep their own cultural identities.  That being said, you can, of course,
take the metaphor further and note that a real mosaic will often have a
unifying theme - it's still _one_ mosaic after all.

It helps to think about things in this manner when reading articles like
this one where the German Chancellor has declared multiculturalism in
Germany to be a failure.
