---
date: 2024-10-05T09:36:25-04:00
title: "Looking for Paella in All the Wrong Places"
blurb: "We visited Spain for 10 days and learned that Duo Lingo doesn't work"
post-status: draft
mp-syndicate-to:
- mastodon
tags: 
 - travel
 - spain
---

The pandemic put a cramp in my travel habits, as it did with everyone.  The
last overseas trip that Evelyn and I went on was to Poland in 2016 and the
last one that we actually *planned* was to Greece in 2015 (and, my God, it's
hard for me to accept that we went to Greece *9 years ago*).  We've been to
a handful of relatively local destinations (Vancouver, New York, PEI) in the
interim but nothing particularly *foreign*.

And while I do remain part of an increasingly small minority of people who
still thinks about the pandemic in the present tense, I *also* wanted to
finally visit someplace a bit more exotic.

So....we choose Spain. Or rather I choose it, and I dragged Evelyn along.

I started making inquiries.  What was Spain like?  What was worth seeing?
What wasn't?  From the very few people I talked to, the consensus seemed to
be that:

 - The food was amazing
 - Barcelona was amazing
 - Madrid was...not amazing
 - Seville was gorgeous and underrated

Also, I wanted to avoid a repeat of the madness of Greece.  We managed to
pack a lot into 10 days for that trip, and it was all interesting, but the
trade off was that we were constantly on the move, never staying more than a
couple of days in one spot.  I wanted something a bit more stable this time.
So, we settled on 6 nights in Barcelona, 3 nights in Seville and 1 night in
Madrid since we were flying out of there the next day.

This trip was planned the same year as people started protesting mass
tourism in Spain and other parts of Europe, and while I hoped that
travelling in September would spare us the worst of it, I also got some
advice on how to blend in...or at least on how to avoid walking around with
a giant neon arrow pointed at my head flashing "tourist".  Mostly this
involved dressing plainly and not being obnoxious.

Did it work?  Were we attacked with water guns?  Was the food indeed
amazing?  Read on to find out!

## There is No Barcelona Syndrome

Our first stop was Barcelona, our home for the next few days.  Before we get
into it though, I want to take a small detour and talk about another famous
and tourist-laden European city: Paris.  In particular, I want to talk about
something called the Paris Syndrome.

Paris Syndrome is the cognitive dissonance felt by many tourists when they
visit a legendary city like Paris.  It's the name given to the contrast
between knowing in your heart of hearts that Paris is the very epitome of
European high-culture and the fact that, when you visit, there's dog shit
everywhere.  It's particularly common among Japanese tourists, who tend to
put the city on a pedestal and who tend to come from cities where, I can
only assume, people tend to pick up after their pets.

One interesting twist to all this is that I didn't actually experience Paris
Syndrome when I visited the city for the first time 20 years ago.  I wasn't
very well-travelled and Europe was still so new to me at the time, so every
street, every back alley, no matter how mundane, took on an air of the
exotic for the simple reason that it *wasn't home*.  It's not that I didn't
notice the dog shit - I most definitely noticed it - it's more that it lent
an interesting texture to a place that was already bearing down on me with
the gravitas of its history.

Or maybe it's because I come from Montreal.  Montreal has its share of
grime.  The dog shit didn't faze me as much as some people.

So, with that in mind, I would like to point out that there doesn't appear
to be such a thing as Barcelona Syndrome - at least, not according to
Wikipedia.  Everyone I've talked to raves about the place.  Madrid?  You can
skip it.  Barcelona?  Don't you fucking *dare*.  The food, the architecture,
the beaches - by all accounts Barcelona walks on water in a way that Paris
does not.

Why is this?  Is Barcelona that amazing?  Or is it that it doesn't have
quite the same lofty reputation as Paris, and so people's expectations are
lower?  I don't know, but I'll say this.  When I was discussing with Evelyn
how long we would stay, she expressed concern that 5 days would too much.
She was genuinely concerned that we would be bored after day 3.

Since Paris, of course, I've been back to Europe several times and while
many parts of it are indeed achingly beautiful, I've now "been there" and
"done that", so to speak.  I'm no longer impressed by something that's
different just because it's different and I can safely say that it takes
more than just a slightly distinctive looking alley to engage my sense of
wonder.  And dog shit, no two ways about it, is a blight on society.

So, given that this isn't my first rodeo, but *also* that everyone really,
*really* seems to love Barcelona...how was it?

## Barcelona: Less Vibes, More Sights, and Gaudi Everywhere

Let's start with the Airbnb.  It was located in the Barcelona Sans district,
right near the train station, and only a 5 minute walk from the metro.
While our accommodations were modest, our hostess was Ukrainian and
legitimately one of the friendliest people I've ever met in my life.

Here's the part of the story where I learned that Duo Lingo is a lie.  Our
hostess spoke Ukrainian and Spanish - but not much English.  No problem, I
think to myself - I've been Duo Lingo-ing Spanish for a over a year and we
should be fine, right?  Right?

Hahahahaha!  I don't know if I'm just bad at this but our Spanish was
*rough*, y'all.  As in, non-existent.  We desperately relied on Google
Translate here.

Still, our room was decent enough and very well situated, so it was hard to
complain.  And while no part of Barcelona is completely tourist-free, this
area wasn't completely overrun with them, so that was a win.  The
neighbourhood felt...lived in.  Undeniably pleasant, but I wasn't

We booked our first touristy thing to do the night we flew in - a tour of
Casa Batllo, by all accounts a "must see", and so we decided we *had to* see
it.  It's a building designed by Antoni Gaudi, a name that crops up again
and again in connection to Barcelona - it sometimes feels like he designed
half the city.  For what it's worth, it didn't disappoint - the thing looked
like it was built from bones; indeed, I later discovered that the locals
sometimes call it the House of Bones.

So, here's something that immediately sets Barcelona apart from Paris in my
mind, either because I'm less of a wide-eyed traveller nowadays or because
of something intrinsically different.  Paris, to me at least, is the kind of
city where you can just kind of...soak up the vibe.  Obviously, there are a
ton of specific things to see and do, but it's *also* possible to just amble
along aimlessly and still feel like you're experiencing something special
and unique.  There's less of that in Barcelona.  Barcelona feels more like a
*city of things to see*.  Less vibe, more sights, if that makes sense.

That night, we discovered why the city appears to have so little litter,
despite being so crowded.  It's because they empty out the garbage bins
*every single night*.  We were woken up to the sounds of glass bottles being
crushed in a garbage truck around 2am.  Good thing we brought earplugs.  I
was prepared the next night.

(Interesting philosophical question: if this had happened while I was in
Paris, would I have chalked it up to the "texture" of the city?  I don't
know but I can tell you that I was certainly not impressed this time
around).

The theme continued the next day, when we toured the Sagrada Familia,
another Gaudi special.  Nominally a Catholic Basilica, I can safely say that
the Sagrada Familia was one of the top things I'll forever remember about
Barcelona.  As one starts to experience more of Gaudi's work, you begin to
notice similar themes.  The guy was really into making his creations look
organic - *grown* rather than *designed*.  Sometimes that meant making them
look like they were built bones, and sometimes it meant making them look
like they were grown from crystals.  In the case of the Sagrada Familia, it
looks like *both*.

Later that day we visited Park Guell, yet another Gaudi creation (this guy
is *everywhere* in Barcelona).  Not quite the jaw dropping spectacle of the
Sagrada Familiar, Park Guell still looks like something out of Dr. Seuss.

## El Born

We booked a walking tour for the next day.  While the walking tour was
extremely informative, and our tour guide was very knowledgeable and very
nice, I know that 10 years from now the only thing I'm going to really
remember about it is that the walk took us through a part of town called El
Born.

El Born is effectively the Old Town of Barcelona, and it's basically the
exception to my statement that Barcelona is less vibe, and more sites.  El
Born is *all vibe*.  I can't think of a single, specific thing to do there
that stuck out more than the neighbourhood itself.  It's chock full of
charming little side streets and alleyways, many of which date back to the
medieval era.  It's very easy to get lost here, and it's very easy not to
care.

## How to Visit a Beach in Barcelona

Barcelona actually has a city beach, called the Barceloneta, that dates back
to 1992, when the city hosted the Olympics.  It's a serviceable beach that
is nonetheless not the one most people think of when they think of a beach
near Barcelona.  No, the beach that crosses everyone's minds when they think
of Barcelona is *Sitges*.

In theory, getting there should have been easy for us.  We were right near
the train station!  It's only a 45 minute ride.  This should have been a
cake walk.

Alas, we...did not fully understand how the ticketing system worked, and
ended buying a ticket to someplace completely different.  Luckily, Evelyn
discovered our mistake before we got too far.  Still...28 Euros down the
drain and we only got to Sitges around 4pm.

It was worth it, though.  The town sports 17 beaches, none of which were
crowded at that time of year.  The Mediterranean waters were choppy but
warm, and became much less choppy the more you swam out.  I can only imagine
how pleasant the excursion would have been if we had, you know, actually
gotten on the right train.

