---
date: 2023-09-17T14:14:59-04:00
title: "Some People Need to Calm Down About the Wheel of Time Show"
blurb: "Adaptations are hard work, and the Wheel of Time is harder than most"
mp-syndicate-to:
- mastodon
tags: 
---



If you're a fantasy aficionado you probably know about The Wheel of Time,
Robert Jordan's enormous, sprawling epic, spanning 14 door stopping volumes
published over a period of 24 years (1989-2013).

I myself am not a great reader of fantasy, but I do know something about
these books, having been introduced to them in my early teens by a high
school friend in the early nineties.  Their publication coincided with the
popular rise of the Internet and the birth of the Web; I have many fond
memories of scouring newsgroups and fan sites, looking for theories about
what was going to happen in the next book.

My fascination with the series lasted until book nine, by which point I gave
up.  The infamous slog had begun, and I was knee deep in it.  It felt like
Robert Jordan had lost control of the story.  It became clear to me that he
didn't what to do with all the loose threads he had created.  I still kept
up with what happened after, and I know Brandon Sanderson picked up the
baton after Jordan died, but I never read anything after that.

I say all this to give you some sense of my relationship to these books - my
credentials, if you will.  I'm a fan, but I'm not an *uber* fan.  I haven't
even read the whole series *once*, let alone multiple times.  I liked the
books a lot, and it definitely made an impression on my teenage mind, but I
can't say that I *loved* them.  I am (or at least was) an *enthusiastic* fan
but I'm not an *obsessive* one.  Keep that in mind for what comes next.

## The Difficulty of Adapting *The Wheel Of Time*

When I heard that Amazon was adapting *The Wheel of Time*, my primary
emotion was surprise followed by...curiosity?  I wanted to see how (or if)
they would pull it off.

I mean, adapting such a well-known and well-loved series has to be a
difficult and thankless job at the best of times, but it must be
*particularly* hard in the case of *The Wheel of Time* (and Amazon didn't do
itself any favours by restricting the seasons to 8 episodes each).

I mean, with thousands of characters, and hundreds of locations, the sheer
size of it is daunting (understatement!), but it's not just that.

The simple truth is that this is no ordinary book series.  It doesn't really
translate well to a traditional season-based TV narrative structure. There
are reasons it's been deemed unfilmable.

So much of the series is *invisible*.  Aes Sedai in the book are famously
composed, almost Vulcan-like.  Warders, or at least Lan, are famously stoic.
A lot of the so-called dialogue consists of people talking to themselves.
And don't get me started on the background.  Half of the story takes place
in the insanely comprehensive glossary at the back of each book, before the
meat of the plot even begins.

Add to this: the books are full of characters who often appear in one or two
chapters, and then don't get mentioned again until several (long) books
later (Bors? Aginor? Balthamel? Aludra?).  This might be workable in a
printed medium (barely) but it becomes a real problem when you have to hire
real actors, and you're at risk of losing them to different projects in
between seasons.

And it's not just characters - some important artifacts are given the same
treatment as well.  Case in point (and major spoiler warning): the Choedan
Kal are briefly seen in book 2, are not mentioned again until book 4, and
aren't actually used for anything until book 9.  How exactly does this
translate to TV?  Are you supposed to mention something once in season 2
and then not mention it again until season 4?

(The thing is, the show actually did this with the introduction of Dain
Bornhald.  He's the son of a character that appears in one episode from last
season.  I can't imagine anyone remembers him.  It's frankly a weak
introduction).

In addition, the vibe of first book is very different from the rest of the
series, and the ending of first *three* books basically consists of the same
sword fight between the same two characters.  It's generally agreed that the
series only really begins to come into its own in book 4.

The upshot is that you can't really do a straight "one book = one season" TV
adaptation of The Wheel of Time.  You need to adapt the whole series at
once, and that's *hard*.  I don't envy the people who've been given this
task.

## Separating the Wheat From the Chaff

Okay, so with all that in mind...how was The Wheel of Time show?

Given the controversy it's caused, I feel I have to be extra careful and
measured in my response.

First off, before I give any concrete opinions about the show, I do need to
vent a little bit about some aspects of the fandom.  Some 
