---
date: 2023-08-28T22:33:32-04:00
title: "A Library of the World"
blurb: "Having a library is a privilege"
mp-syndicate-to:
- mastodon
tags: 
---

I recently saw [Umberto Eco: A Library of the World][1], a documentary about
Umberto Eco's extensive book collection.  At first blush this doesn't sound
like the sort of topic that would make for an interesting documentary but
with something like 50000 books spread over two libraries, a significant
number of them dating from the medieval era, there's actually a surprising
amount of stuff to unpack here.  If you like books, you'll like the film.  I
thought it was great.

In my case, I found myself thinking less about the books themselves and more
about the subtext surrounding them.  Eco was unsurprisingly disdainful of
e-books and valued the physical durability of paper.  It's an opinion with
which it's easy to sympathize given how e-books are often saddled today with
restrictive DRM and competing formats.  Ink on paper doesn't have a "format"
problem and often lasts centuries.  Do you think you'll be able to read your
Kindle 100 years from now?

And physical books are just *nicer*, right?  The cover art, the paper, the
smell, the ability to see how much you have left to read at a glance - it
all adds up to an *experience*.  And I still say that a real, paper book
remains the easiest way to read something.

That being said, paper books *also* take up a significant amount of space
and that's where it all breaks down, of course.  Eco had *two* houses and
his book collection took up a significant amount of space in *both* of them.
Meanwhile, many young people today, especially in large cities, have trouble
buying even a modest house and they are often lucky to have room for just
one bookcase.

So while I get the appeal of paper, and I have a bunch of paper books
myself, I find myself less dismissive of e-books than some people my age
(I'm in my 40's).  Their promise - thousands of books in one small device -
is hard to ignore.  The disdain of some people comes off as self-righteous
and clueless.  The amount of privilege required to have a library worth
exploring is considerable and I know I'm lucky to have one, paltry as it is.

So, nowadays, my format of choice for a book tends to be electronic until
it's proven to have an impact on my life.  Often I don't *know* it's made an
impact until some time after I've read it.  If I find myself describing the
book to random people at parties, that's usually a hint.  At that point,
I'll carve out a place on my bookshelf and buy the real thing.  It feels
like a decent compromise.

And I'm pretty good about getting rid of books, too.  Gone are the days when
I hoard them for show.  My library is slowly turning into just the books
that are meaningful to me, which is as it should be.

Still, though, Umberto Eco's library is thing of beauty :-)

[1]: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt26242614/
