---
date: 2022-07-01T12:42:24-04:00
title: "Amaro Showdown at Casa Di Desmond"
blurb: "I have a small collection of Italian Amaros.  Which one do I like the best?"
post-status: draft
mp-syndicate-to:
- twitter_bridgy
tags: 
- cocktails
featured:
- alt: Amaro collection
  value: /static/img/amaros.jpg
---

A while back I started going through a phase where I would buy any
reasonably well-reviewed bottle of Italian amaro I could find at my local
liquor store, in a halfhearted and very likely misguided attempt to
reconnect with my Italian roots (my mother is from Sicily).  I can't
honestly say that it worked (what would that even look like?) but it *did*
result, as you might expect, in a small collection of Italian amari being
added to my home bar.

(The plural of "amaro", as I learned, is "amari", not "amaros" so, hey,
maybe it kind of worked after all)

The word "amaro" means "bitter" in Italian and, accordingly, amari are a
class of Italian herbal liqueurs characterized by a syrupy, bittersweet
flavour, often described as "medicinal".  They are usually consumed after a
heavy meal as a digestive and they vary in strength from "strong wine" (15%)
to "out-and-out hard liquor" (40%).

You can think of them as Italy's answer to a product like Jaggermeister,
though I realize as I write this that the comparison would probably be
considered unfavourable, as Jaggermeister has a bad reputation (stemming, I
suspect, more from teenage antics than because of any inherently bad
qualities).  They can also be compared to something like Chartreuse, a
similar French herbal digestive about which I have written before, and I
suspect the comparison there is a bit more flattering.

The flavour profile of a typical amaro is a balance between sweet and
bitter, herbal and citrus, spicy and floral.  Depending on the brand, some
of these qualities are more prominent than others.  So, in that spirit
(ha!), I have decided to taste test all the amari I have in my bar, side by
side, to see how they compare.  Here they are, lined up for your viewing
pleasure:

<img src="/static/img/amari.jpg" alt="My amaro collection" class="entry__photo image"/>

I'll give away some of the ending right now: they
do differ quite significantly in flavour, and some are definitely more of an
acquired taste than others (I'm looking at *you*, Fernet Branca).

I don't really have any consistent strategy for describing the flavours here
and to be honest a lot of this is for my benefit as much as anyone's.
Still, if you've never tried this kind of tipple, you may find this useful
to an extent.  Enjoy!

## Amaro Averna

**Colour**: Dark, maybe even black, like Cola.

**Alcohol**: 29%

**Taste**: sweet, medical, syrupy, caramel.

This one comes from Caltanissetta, Sicily, and dates back to 1868.  It's
apparently quite famous in that region.  The bottle is annoyingly tall,
which sounds so petty, I know, but it's hard to fit on my cart and that's
annoying!

Like almost all amari, the recipe here is a closely guarded secret but is
supposed to include things like orange peel.  I have to admit, I didn't
really detect any citrus.

All in all, I found that this one tasted vaguely of cough medicine.  It was
sickly sweet, medical, syrupy, with some caramel notes.  There was some
bitterness, as always in an amaro, but it's not the most prominent flavour.

I got to say, not my favourite.

## Zucca Rabarbaro

**Colour**: Dark, like the Averna.

**Alcohol**: 30%

**Taste**: Bitter, vegetal.

Although Zucca is Italian for "squash" or "pumpkin", the name actually comes
from Caff√® Zucca in Milan, where it's a featured drink.  The main gimmick
here would be the inclusion of Chinese rhubarb in the ingredients list,
though I'm not sure I detected that specific ingredient as anything more
than a vague vegatal aftertaste.
 
In any case, this one was quite intensely bitter, more so than the other
amari I tried, with a lingering, almost harsh aftertaste.  It was borderline
unpleasant.  I would not call this drink approachable.

## Cynar

**Colour**: Dark, like Cola.

**Alcohol**: 16.5%

**Taste**: Bitter, syrupy, vegetal

On the bitter side, though not as bitter as the Zucca.  Smoother
than the Zucca, a bit more syrupy.

The gimmick here is the inclusion of artichoke in the ingredient list
(Cynara scolymus), hence the name.  That being said, I don't really detect
any artichoke in the flavour, beyond perhaps a vague kind of vegetal
aftertaste.

There is above average bitterness here, but not as much as the Zucca.  I
would, in fact, characterize this one as a smoother, more syrupy, less
bitter and harsh version of the Zucca.

## Amaro Montenegro

**Colour**: Amber, perhaps the colour of a sweet vermouth or an aged whisky.

**Alcohol**: 23%

**Taste**: Sweet, perfumed, floral, spicy.

This one hails from Bologna. Very sweet, perfumed and floral.  Some
bitterness, obviously, but it's in the background and isn't the manin focus
of the drink.  Much more obviously spiced than the other amari.

All in all, quite delicious and approachable.  Maybe my favourite of the
bunch.

## Amaro Nonino

**Colour**: Amber, like the Montenegro.

**Alcohol**: 35%

**Taste**: Sweet, citrusy.

This one is a stronger amaro, based on grappa, hailing from Friuli, Italy.
The bitterness here is more pronounced than the Montenegro, but less so
than, for example, the Zucca or Cynar.  I find the citrus is more pronounced
here, almost like a Triple Sec.

I liked it, but maybe not as much as the Montenegro.  Still quite
approachable.

## Vecchio Amaro Del Capo

**Colour**: Dark amber

**Alcohol**: 35%

**Taste**: Sweet, herbal.

This one comes from Calabria.  It's rather sweet, and not as intensely
bitter as the Zucca or Cynar.

The flavour is hard to pin down.  There's anise, some citrus, and some mint.
Like all amari, there's bitterness there, but it doesn't hit you over the
head.

I would say that the anise is a bit more noticeable than the other amari on
this list, which would make this one fairly comparable to something like
Jaggermeister or Chartreuse, though a bit more complex.

I like this one a lot, to be honest.

## Amaro Lucana

**Colour**: Dark

**Alcohol**: 28%

**Taste**: Sweet, citrusy with notes of anise

This one dates back to 1894 and was apparently created by a pastry chef.

There's anise and citrus here.  Bitterness, as awlays, and it's more
pronounced that the Montenegro.  Less harsh than the Zucca, but still
comparable: black, syrupy, and bitter. medical.

I actually quite liked this one, maybe more than the Cynar, but perhaps not
as much as the Vecchio.

## Fernet-Branca

**Colour**: Dark

**Alcohol**: 39%

**Taste**:  Bitter, minty, lacking in sweetness

My goodness, how to describe Fernet-Branca?  It completely unlike anything
else in this collection, to the point where I was debating whether I should
include it at all.  Wikipedia calls it an amaro, though, so I decided,
somewhat grudgingly, to include it.

There is very little sweetness here, and a big hit of mint, with a lingering
bitter finish.  More than anything else on this list, the taste can best be
described as "medicinal".  I mean that literally; Fernet-Branca really does
taste like medicine, and not necessarily in a good way.

There are, apparently, some people who actually like the taste, but I
haven't met any of them.  I guess I could call it an acquired taste and
leave it at that.

Drink it to calm your stomach, and hope for the best.
