---
date: 2022-04-26T09:03:05-04:00
title: "Fifteen Years of Blogging"
blurb: "Fifteen years ago today, I started blogging"
mp-syndicate-to:
- twitter_bridgy
tags:
- blogging
---

Fifteen years ago today, I published my first blog post and I wanted to mark
the occasion with - you guessed it! - a blog post.

Anniversaries are often a chance to reminisce, so I decided to take a trip
down memory lane and skim over everything I've posted over the years.  Has
the character of my blog changed over time?

And the answer is...yes, though in possibly unexpected ways.

The first year of my blog tended to be a bit more diary oriented.  There's a
post in there about my friend Neil's bachelor party.  There's another post
about nothing more than the fact that it's snowing outside.  There's a brief
one on hockey riots and another about my trip on a glider.

This kind of content pretty much stopped after the first year, except for
the occasional vacation post (see, for example, my post about my trip to
Greece, the one about my trip to Poland, and the one where I visited Chicago
and New York).  These are actually a lot of fun to write and I should
probably should have written more of them.

Thinking about it now, I joined Facebook the same year that I started my
blog, and I would imagine it's not a coincidence that these kinds of diary
entries began to dry up as I became more active on social media.  Facebook
effectively became my diary, I suppose.  It makes me a bit sad to think
about it.

There's a three year gap from 2008-2011, ostensibly because my blog got
overrun with spam.  A number of things happened in that gap - my dad died,
for one, and I also bought a 100 year old apartment.  It's a shame that I
don't have any posts about that.

One thing that hasn't changed is that I tend to blog a lot about blogging,
particularly about the technology or workflow I'm using at the time.  In
fact, "blogging" is the single biggest entry on my tag page.  I'm not sure
what to make of that, except that I suppose I tend to fall into the common
engineering trap of getting caught up in the tools I use.

What can I say?  Blogging software (and web publishing software in general,
really) is a topic that fascinates me. I'm old enough to still be amazed at
the idea that a random person can put a random web page on a random web
server and have it be instantly accessible to the rest of the world.

I started this blog with an obscure little Perl program called Blosxom,
moved on fairly quickly to my own homegrown engine called YAWT (first
written in Perl, then in Python) and I eventually started using Pelican when
I got tired of fixing bugs in my own code.  I've recently switched to using
Eleventy.

If you're at all familiar with blogging software, you may have noticed that
certain popular programs like Wordpress are not on the list.  That's because
I prefer to write my blog entries as plain text files on disk, a personal
idiosyncrasy which limits my choice of publishing software.  In fact, I
suspect that one of the reasons my blog has lasted as long as it has is
because my stuff is all written in plain text - a topic that likely deserves
its own post.

I also appear write a lot about programming, which is not entirely
unexpected given what I do for a living (spoiler: I'm a software developer).
It *is* kind of interesting to see how these articles change over time.  I
wrote a couple of Perl articles in 2007, when I was still using Blosxom.  I
started writing about Python in 2012, a couple of years after I attended
OOPSLA, and I decided that I wanted to learn a dynamic language that wasn't
Perl.  I eventually moved on to Typescript.

Mixed with all of that are a handful of articles on Emacs, which implicitly
involves writing about Emacs Lisp
 
